---
layout: post
title: Ubuntu devenv
permalink: /500
tags: [admin, administration, apache, apt, bind, dns, hosts, lamp, mass, postfix, tasksel, ubuntu, vhost]
----

Tips for configuring php development enviroment in ubuntu.

## Installing apps


First of all install tasksel:

    
    sudo apt-get install tasksel


To list available tasks use:

    
    tasksel --list-tasks


We're going to install lamp-server, dns-server, mail-server.

## Installing LAMP


We're going install apache, mysql and php, to do so, type:

    
    sudo tasksel install lamp-server


This command will install and configure all this programs automaticaly. While
installing you will be promted to enter root password for mysql.


After installing try to open http://localhost if all ok you will see message
"It Works".


It is time to setup some packages that not installed by tasksel, like pear,
gd, curl etc.

    
    sudo apt-get install php-pear php5-xdebug php-apc curl libcurl3 php5-curl php5-gd php5-tidy php5-xmlrpc phpmyadmin cron wget phpunit libzend-framework-php libzend-framework-zendx-php zend-framework zend-framework-bin


While installing you will be promted for phpmyadmin password.


Also here is some examples using pear:

    
    sudo pear install --alldeps PhpDocumentor
    pear list
    sudo pear upgrade-all


After all installed, last step to do is enable rewrite module (and some other
modules), and you may host almost any site in /var/www, to do so type:

    
    sudo a2enmod deflate
    sudo a2enmod expires
    sudo a2enmod rewrite
    sudo /etc/init.d/apache2 restart


Now edit /etc/apache2/sites-available/default and change AllowOverride to All
for / and /var/www directories, otherwise clean urls wont work. Do not forget
restart apache after doing changes to configs.


Now you will be able to host probably anything in your /var/www. But I always
need to host many projects, so i again and again create virtual host for each
and record in /ets/hosts file and it makes me crazy. What i going to do is
setup DNS server to resole any subdomain to localhost and configure apache
mass virtual hosting.


**NOTICE: to make mod_rewrite work u must add RewriteBase /**

## Installing DNS


To install DNS just type:

    
    sudo tasksel install dns-server


I'm going to configure local.com domain, but it may be really anithing u want.


First edit /etc/bind/named.conf.local, and add:

    
    zone "local.com" {
    	type master;
    	file "/etc/bind/db.local.com";
    };


Then:

    
    sudo cp /etc/bind/db.local /etc/bind/db.local.com


Then edit /etc/bind/db.local.com, replace all localhost string to local.com
and add following line to end of file:

    
    *.local.com. IN A 127.0.0.1


No check your file, restart bind and check is it works:

    
    named-checkzone local.com /etc/bind/db.local.com
    sudo /etc/init.d/bind9 restart
    nslookup aa.bb.local.com 127.0.0.1


Now when DNS is working we need to tell dhcp to use it, just uncomment
following line in /etc/dhcp3/dhclient.conf:

    
    prepend domain-name-servers 127.0.0.1;


Now after restart you will be able to ping any subdomain for local.com.

## Apache Mass Virtual Hosting


Main idea is that you will have folder projects, and its subfolders will be
subdomains to local.com. To configure this you will need vhost_alias module,
enable it by typing:

    
    sudo a2enmod vhost_alias
    sudo /etc/init.d/apache2 restart


Now create folders for your projects:

    
    mkdir -p ~/Projects/zf
    mkdir -p ~/Projects/drupal
    mkdir -p ~/Projects/wp
    mkdir -p ~/Projects/script


And create file /etc/apache2/sites-available/local.com and edit it like this:

    
    # AllowOverride for mod_rewrite
    # Do not forget to change directory path
    <Directory /home/mac/Projects>
    	Options All
    	AllowOverride All
    </Directory>
    
    # Replacements for subdomains
    # %0 - test1.drupal.local.com > test1.drupal.local.com
    # %1 - test1.drupal.local.com > test1
    
    <VirtualHost *:80>
            ServerAlias *.drupal.local.com
            VirtualDocumentRoot /home/mac/Projects/drupal/%1
    </VirtualHost>
    
    # If using netbeans
    # ln -s /home/mac/NetBeansProjects /home/mac/Projects/nb
    # Notice: project names must be in lower case to work
    <VirtualHost *:80>
            ServerAlias *.nb.local.com
            VirtualDocumentRoot /home/mac/Projects/nb/%1
    </VirtualHost>
    
    <VirtualHost *:80>
            ServerAlias *.script.local.com
            VirtualDocumentRoot /home/mac/Projects/script/%1
    </VirtualHost>
    
    <VirtualHost *:80>
            ServerAlias *.wp.local.com
            VirtualDocumentRoot /home/mac/Projects/wp/%1
    </VirtualHost>
    
    <VirtualHost *:80>
    	ServerAlias *.zf.local.com
    	VirtualDocumentRoot /home/mac/Projects/zf/%1/public
    </VirtualHost>


Now if you create ~/Projects/wp/test1/index.php it will be accessible on
http://test1.wp.local.com.


All left to do is to configure mail.

## Install mail server


To install mail server just type:

    
    sudo tasksel install mail-server


While installing mail server choose "Internet site". When you will be asked to
enter domain type local.com.


After installing add following lines to end of /etc/postfix/main.cf file:

    
    local_recipient_maps =
    # Replace mac to your user name
    luser_relay = mac


This lines tells that all mail will be mailed to specific user.


Now restart postfix:

    
    sudo /etc/init.d/postfix restart


And you will be able to send mails to user1@local.com, user2@local.com etc.
All mail will be mailed to your local mailbox.


Try this script ~/Projects/script/mail/index.php, accessible via
http://mail.script.local.com/, run it at least once when all done, to create
local mailbox file:

    
    <?php
    $r = mail('user1@local.com', 'test', 'test');
    $m = $r ? 'yes' : 'no';
    echo $m;


To retrive local mail, add account to evolution.


When evolution will asks for retriving mail configuration, choose "Local",
evolution will asks for file with mails, run previous script and file will be
created, and placed at /var/mail/mac


**Uploadprogress**

    
    sudo pecl install uploadprogress




After install create file /etc/php5/apache2/conf.d/uploadprogress.ini with
following line

    
    extension=uploadprogress.so




**ServerName**

Put into /etc/apache2/httpd.conf

    
    ServerName local.com




**PHP**

Edit /etc/php5/apache2/php.ini

    
    error_reporting = E_ALL & ~E_NOTICE
    display_errors = On
    display_startup_errors = On
    track_errors = On
    html_errors = On
    memory_limit = 128M
    post_max_size = 128M
    upload_max_filesize = 128M
    max_execution_time = 900




**XDEBUG**

Edit /etc/php5/apache2/conf.d/xdebug.ini

    
    xdebug.remote_enable=On
    xdebug.remote_enable=1
    xdebug.remote_handler=dbgp
    xdebug.remote_mode=req
    xdebug.remote_host=127.0.0.1
    xdebug.remote_port=9000




**Permissions**

    
    sudo chgrp -R www-data /var/www
    sudo chmod -R 777 /var/www
    sudo chmod -R g+st /var/www
    sudo usermod -a -G www-data mac #YOUR USERNAME HERE


**Sun Java**

    
    sudo add-apt-repository ppa:ferramroberto/java
    sudo apt-get update
    sudo apt-get install sun-java6-jdk sun-java6-plugin
    sudo update-alternatives --config java


**Rewrite**

Add to /etc/php5/apache2/php.ini

    
    auto_prepend_file = /var/www/vhosts/virtual.prepend.php




with following content:

    
    <?php
    $http_host = explode('.',$_SERVER['HTTP_HOST']);
    $__mod_vhost_alias_fix_doc_root = dirname(__FILE__) . DIRECTORY_SEPARATOR . $http_host[0];
    
    if (is_dir($__mod_vhost_alias_fix_doc_root))
    {
    $_SERVER['__MOD_VHOST_FIX_OLD_DOCUMENT_ROOT'] = $_SERVER['DOCUMENT_ROOT'];
    $_SERVER['DOCUMENT_ROOT'] = $__mod_vhost_alias_fix_doc_root;
    }
    ?>




**Links**

[http://www.vmirgorod.name/11/1/20/drupal-development-environment-based-
ubuntu-1010](http://www.vmirgorod.name/11/1/20/drupal-development-environment-
based-ubuntu-1010)

